update(blog)!: Chat Control Must Be Stopped, Act Now! (#3111)
privacyguides/privacyguides.org: blog/posts/chat-control-must-be-stopped.md

Once a vulnerability is found by criminals, they will have the same access as authorities have to our data. With Chat Control, this means pretty much all our data.

In addition, Chat Control could facilitate the proliferation of even more spyware and [stalkerware](https://stopstalkerware.org/) on the market, thriving on the vulnerabilities found in the powerful system. This would allow *anyone* to purchase access to spy on *anyone*, including databases of identified children. It could give a direct backdoor-access to pedophiles. How could *this* be helping to protect the children?

### The danger is inside

Even if the idea of online strangers accessing children's sensitive data is terrifying, the worse danger in often much closer.

> Sadly, we already know that [most](https://content.c3p.ca/pdfs/C3P_SurvivorsSurveyFullReport2017.pdf) child sexual abuse is perpetrated by adults close to the child, in the majority of cases a family member even. A study found that 42% of CSAM victims identified their biological or adoptive father as the main offender, and that two-thirds of the images appear to have been [produced at home](https://theconversation.com/new-research-shows-parents-are-major-producers-of-child-sexual-abuse-material-153722). Chat Control would do nothing to fight this, in fact, it could facilitate it.

Author: Yes, but I think it misses a "of"

**Better privacy protections also means better protections for the children.**

Children themselves should receive better education on how their data is used online and how to protect it. Additionally, it is vital to provide better education on what behaviors aren't normal coming from an adult, and how to reach out for help when it happens. Children should have access to safe and confidential resources to report abuse, whether it's happening outside or inside their home.

Parents should be careful when sharing information about their children. And when they have to, they should benefit from complete confidentiality, knowing their communication is fully end-to-end encrypted and not shared with anyone else.

There is so much we can do to help to protect better the children online, surveillance is the opposite of it all.

## How would this affect me?

> If this regulation was to be approved on **October 14th, 2025** (the date for the final vote), consequences would be devastating for everyone, even outside the European Union.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If this regulation is approved on **October 14th, 2025** (the date for the final vote), the consequences would be devastating for everyone, even outside the European Union.
```

We have seen how platforms implemented better privacy practices and features after the GDPR became effective in 2018, features that often benefited people worldwide. This could have the same effect in reverse.

> Every platform potentially handling data of people located in the EU would be subjected to the law. Platforms would be obligated to scan all communications and all files of (at least) data subjects located in the EU, even data currently protected with end-to-end encryption. This would affect popular apps and services like Signal, Tuta mail, Proton mail, WhatsApp, Telegram, and much more.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Every platform potentially handling data of people located in the EU would be subjected to the law. Platforms would be obligated to scan all communications and all files of (at least) data subjects located in the EU, even data currently protected with end-to-end encryption. This would affect popular apps and services like Signal, Tuta, Proton, WhatsApp, Telegram, and much more.
```

Many services you currently rely on right now would simply shut down, or move away from Europe entirely. Businesses might also move outside of Europe if they worry about protecting their proprietary information. This could cause massive layoffs, while organizations move to jurisdictions where they are allowed to keep their data protected and unobserved.

Finally, even if this doesn't affect you personally, or you don't believe it will, [**this isn't just about you**](the-privacy-of-others.md).

The data of vulnerable people would be exposed and their safety put at risk. Victims might decide to stop reaching out for help or reporting crimes. Sources requiring anonymity might decide the risk isn't worth reporting valuable information to journalists. Opponents of governments in power could be silenced. Every democracy in the European Union would suffer greatly from it.

> Chat Control is completely antithetical to the values the European Union had been presenting to the world in recent years.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Chat Control is completely antithetical to the values the European Union has been presenting to the world in recent years.
```
